manuscript/02-more-about-language.md, before:

# Understanding the program

## How to run Python code?

Watch on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wSqRUTS7uAg)

There are two modes of running Python code: Interactive and Batch.

#### Interactive mode
Code is typed inside an interpreter session which gets evaluated immediately. This mode is suitable for small edits. 

To start the interpreter, type `python3` or `python` on your machine, when the interpreter starts, it should look like this:

```
    Python 3.6.0 (default, Jan 13 2017, 22:22:15)
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>>
```

This shows that the default Python shell has started. `>>>` signifies the input location. 

> Note: When you type an if/for/while block in the interpreter, you need to hit the Enter or Return key **twice** for the block to be evaluated.

```python
>>> if True:
...     print("hi")
...     print("another hi") # hit enter twice here
...
```

#### Batch Mode

Code is written in a file from which it is executed. Open the terminal, change the directory to where you saved the above file and type the following to execute `file.py`.

Assuming `$` is your terminal.

    $ python3 file.py


#### Executing 3 vs 2
We are going to use `python3` to run the code. Type `python --version`, if this says 2, then you'll need to install python3 and execute code using python3.
If `python --version` gives you 3, then you'll need to run all the code in this book as `python file.py`

#### Hybrid approach
It is a better practice to use both interpreter and batch mode while writing Python scripts, that way, we can incrementally test small blocks and later add them to our file.

## Installing packages

`pip` or `easy_install` is used for installing third party packages in Python. `pip` stands for Python installer package. The package that you are installing, needs to be hosted on the official packages repository and you can just call `pip install ipython` to install a package named ipython. Read the [docs](https://docs.python.org/3/installing/index.html) for more details.

## Comments

Watch on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oU1rHEnfgcM) | Read the [docs](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical_analysis.html?highlight=comments#comments)

Comments are the lines which the interpreter will _ignore_. The significance of comments lies purely for code readability. It makes  maintaining the project easier. If programming is a religion then Comment would be it's most powerful God capable of making or breaking lives. 

Each block of non obvious code should have appropriate comments associated with it. Consider `a+=1`, there is no need to add a comment saying `increments the variable a by 1` because it is ovious. 

Now, consider `a = 4*c+4*d/6*c`. This is not obvious, it might be Sarick's coefficient, and thus would warrant a comment. 

#### Syntax

They start with a #. It can be present in any position of a line, the text **after** the # till the end of the line is _ignored_ by the interpreter. They are used for statements other than functions/classes.

## Indentation

Watch on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hhMDv0Q6Kps)

Python uses indentation as a part of the syntax as opposed to `{` which C/Java use. Either spaces or tabs can be used for indentation. Typically, four spaces are used. Either spaces or tabs can be used, as long as we do not mix them. If we mix tabs and spaces then it causes an error.

## Getting Help

Before we start understanding how to manipulate lists, we need to understand how to get help in Python.

* `help`: returns the documentation of the data type.
* `dir`: returns all the methods valid for that data type.

Example:

```python
help(1) # help about integer class.
help('') # help about strings.
help(1.1) # help about float.
help([]) # help about lists
```

### Output of `help`

```python
>>> help('')
Help on class str in module builtins:

class str(object)
	|  str(object='') -> str
	|  str(bytes_or_buffer[, encoding[, errors]]) -> str
	|
	|  Create a new string object from the given object. If encoding or
	|  errors is specified, then the object must expose a data buffer
	|  that will be decoded using the given encoding and error handler.
	|  Otherwise, returns the result of object.__str__() (if defined)
	|  or repr(object).
```

### Output of `dir`

```python
>>> dir('')
['__add__', '__class__', '__contains__', '__delattr__', '__dir__', '__doc__', '__eq__', '__format__', '__ge__', '__getattribute__',
'__getitem__', '__getnewargs__', '__gt__', '__hash__', '__init__', '__init_subclass__', '__iter__', '__le__', '__len__', '__lt__', 
'__mod__', '__mul__', '__ne__', '__new__', '__reduce__', '__reduce_ex__', '__repr__', '__rmod__', '__rmul__', '__setattr__', 
'__sizeof__', '__str__', '__subclasshook__', 'capitalize', 'casefold', 'center', 'count', 'encode', 'endswith', 'expandtabs', 'find', 
'format', 'format_map', 'index', 'isalnum', 'isalpha', 'isdecimal', 'isdigit', 'isidentifier', 'islower', 'isnumeric', 'isprintable', 
'isspace', 'istitle', 'isupper', 'join', 'ljust', 'lower', 'lstrip', 'maketrans', 'partition', 'replace', 'rfind', 'rindex', 'rjust', 
'rpartition', 'rsplit', 'rstrip', 'split', 'splitlines', 'startswith', 'strip', 'swapcase', 'title', 'translate', 'upper', 'zfill']
```


##### Links

|[Next](03-01-understanding-variables.md) | [Previous](01-intro-to-python.md) |  [Index](SUMMARY.md)
| --------| --------| --------|

Commit message:

making the book newcomer friendly

manuscript/02-more-about-language.md, after:

# Understanding the program

## How to run Python code?

Watch on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wSqRUTS7uAg)

There are two modes of running Python code: Interactive and Batch.

#### Interactive mode
Code is typed inside an interpreter session which gets evaluated immediately. This mode is suitable for small edits. 

To start the interpreter, type `python3` or `python` on your machine, when the interpreter starts, it should look like this:

```
    Python 3.6.0 (default, Jan 13 2017, 22:22:15)
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>>
```

This shows that the default Python shell has started. `>>>` signifies the input location. 

```python
>>> print("hi")
hi
```

#### Batch Mode

Save the code in a file. if the file name is `file.py`, then we execute it like by typing `python3 file.py` in the command line **not** the interpeter.


#### Executing 3 vs 2
We are going to use `python3` to run the code, depending on your machine, you might need to use `python` instead of `python3` to execute code. 

Type `python --version` on your command prompt. 

    If it says Python 2, then you'll need to install python3 and execute code using `python3 file.py`.
    If it says Python 3, then you'll need to run all the code in this book as `python file.py`

## Installing packages

`pip` or `easy_install` is used for installing third party packages in Python. `pip` stands for Python installer package. The package that you are installing, needs to be hosted on the official packages repository and you can just call `pip install ipython` to install a package named ipython. Read the [docs](https://docs.python.org/3/installing/index.html) for more details.

## Comments

Watch on [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oU1rHEnfgcM) | Read the [docs](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical_analysis.html?highlight=comments#comments)

Comments in Python start with the # character. It can be present in any position of a line, the text **after** the # till the end of the line is the comment.

Comments are ignored by the interpreter. They are used for code readability & maintainability.

Non obvious code should have comments associated with it. 

Consider `a+=1`, there is no need to add a comment saying `increments the variable a by 1` because it is obvious. 

Now, consider `a = 4*c+4*d/6*c`. This is not obvious, thus, would warrant a comment. 

## Getting Help

We need to understand how to get help in Python.

* `help`: returns the documentation of the data type.
* `dir`: returns all the methods valid for that data type.

Example:

```python
help(1) # help about integer class.
help('') # help about strings.
help(1.1) # help about float.
help([]) # help about lists
```

### Output of `help`

```python
>>> help('')
Help on class str in module builtins:

class str(object)
	|  str(object='') -> str
	|  str(bytes_or_buffer[, encoding[, errors]]) -> str
	|
	|  Create a new string object from the given object. If encoding or
	|  errors is specified, then the object must expose a data buffer
	|  that will be decoded using the given encoding and error handler.
	|  Otherwise, returns the result of object.__str__() (if defined)
	|  or repr(object).
```

### Output of `dir`

```python
>>> dir('')
['__add__', '__class__', '__contains__', '__delattr__', '__dir__', '__doc__', '__eq__', '__format__', '__ge__', '__getattribute__',
'__getitem__', '__getnewargs__', '__gt__', '__hash__', '__init__', '__init_subclass__', '__iter__', '__le__', '__len__', '__lt__', 
'__mod__', '__mul__', '__ne__', '__new__', '__reduce__', '__reduce_ex__', '__repr__', '__rmod__', '__rmul__', '__setattr__', 
'__sizeof__', '__str__', '__subclasshook__', 'capitalize', 'casefold', 'center', 'count', 'encode', 'endswith', 'expandtabs', 'find', 
'format', 'format_map', 'index', 'isalnum', 'isalpha', 'isdecimal', 'isdigit', 'isidentifier', 'islower', 'isnumeric', 'isprintable', 
'isspace', 'istitle', 'isupper', 'join', 'ljust', 'lower', 'lstrip', 'maketrans', 'partition', 'replace', 'rfind', 'rindex', 'rjust', 
'rpartition', 'rsplit', 'rstrip', 'split', 'splitlines', 'startswith', 'strip', 'swapcase', 'title', 'translate', 'upper', 'zfill']
```


##### Links

|[Next](03-01-understanding-variables.md) | [Previous](01-intro-to-python.md) |  [Index](SUMMARY.md)
| --------| --------| --------|
