manuscript/03-02-operators.md, before:

# Operators

We will be learning this chapter in an interpreter, so start a session.

        ~ python3
        Python 3.6.0 (default, Jan 13 2017, 22:22:15)
        Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
	>>>

When you get this prompt, the interpreter has started.

Python has the following major operators:

<,>,=,==,>=,<=,!=,\*,+,-,\*\*, +=, -=, /=, \*=, in, and, not

## Assignment

`=` is the assignment operator. It creates variables and stores the values which you give at the right hand side to the left hand side.

```python
>>> a = 1
>>> b = a
```

## Equality

`==` is the equality operator, it returns true if both the operands are same

```python
	>>> a = 1
	>>> b = 1
	>>> a == b
	True
```
It is a classic mistake to use `==` when you really want to use `=` or vice versa. We encourage that you take extreme care to not misuse one when you want to use the other.

## Division

If you have been from a C background, you'll find Python's divide operator a bit different.

```python
>>> i = 10
>>> i/2 # / returns the quotient (floating point number)
5.0
>>> i//2 # returns the quotient (integer number)
5
>>> i%2 # returns the remainder (integer number)
0
```

## Power

`**` is the operator for power.

```python	
>>> a = 12
>>> a**2
144
```

## Membership test

The in operator is used to check the membership, it works on lists, sets and tuples.
```python
>>> a = [1,2,3]
>>> 3 in a
True
```

## Boolean operators

### not

```python
>>> not True
False
>>> a = 2
>>> not a
False
>>> True==False
False
>>> True==True
True
>>> not ''
True
>>> not 'dd'
False
>>> not 1
False
>>> not 0
True
>>> not -1
False
>>> not dict()
True
>>> not list()
True
>>> not [1,2,3]
False
```

Negation works with various data type. `True` and `False` are fixed as far as variable names are concerned, you can't create a variable named True or False. It was possible in python2 to do so.

Anything that can be evaluated to having some value is converted to False by using not. For instance, an empty list would be a _Falsy_ (I am not a big fan of this word) value, hence a `not list()` would evaluate to True.

Same is the case with a `dict()`, or with an integer, 0 is False, anything non zero is True.

### or

```python
>>> True or False
True
>>> False or False
False
```

OR is true when either of the operand is true.

### and

AND is true when both the operands are true.

## Shortcut operators

+=, -=, /=, \*=

If you want to increment a variable by some value, instead of using `a = a + 2`, you can use `a+=2`. This is a shortcut method.
 There is no operator for `++` or `--`, you can use `a+=1` and `a-=1` for those purposes.

Along with this, you can use this syntax for other operations like -=, /=. In each of such operation you perform that operation and store it's value in the variable itself.

##### Links

|[Next](04-list-set-dict.md) | [Previous](03-01-understanding-variables.md) |  [Index](SUMMARY.md)
| ----| ----| ----|

Commit message:

added links to the docs closes #25

manuscript/03-02-operators.md, after:

# Operators

We will be learning this chapter in an interpreter, so start a session.

        ~ python3
        Python 3.6.0 (default, Jan 13 2017, 22:22:15)
        Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
	>>>

When you get this prompt, the interpreter has started.

Python has the following major operators:

<,>,=,==,>=,<=,!=,\*,+,-,\*\*, +=, -=, /=, \*=, in, and, not

## Assignment

`=` is the assignment operator. It creates variables and stores the values which you give at the right hand side to the left hand side.

```python
>>> a = 1
>>> b = a
```

## Equality

`==` is the equality operator, it returns true if both the operands are same

```python
	>>> a = 1
	>>> b = 1
	>>> a == b
	True
```
It is a classic mistake to use `==` when you really want to use `=` or vice versa. We encourage that you take extreme care to not misuse one when you want to use the other.

## Division

If you have been from a C background, you'll find Python's divide operator a bit different.

```python
>>> i = 10
>>> i/2 # / returns the quotient (floating point number)
5.0
>>> i//2 # returns the quotient (integer number)
5
>>> i%2 # returns the remainder (integer number)
0
```

## Power

`**` is the operator for power.

```python	
>>> a = 12
>>> a**2
144
```

## Membership test

The in operator is used to check the membership, it works on lists, sets and tuples.
```python
>>> a = [1,2,3]
>>> 3 in a
True
```

## Boolean operators

### not

```python
>>> not True
False
>>> a = 2
>>> not a
False
>>> True==False
False
>>> True==True
True
>>> not ''
True
>>> not 'dd'
False
>>> not 1
False
>>> not 0
True
>>> not -1
False
>>> not dict()
True
>>> not list()
True
>>> not [1,2,3]
False
```

Negation works with various data type. `True` and `False` are fixed as far as variable names are concerned, you can't create a variable named True or False. It was possible in python2 to do so.

Anything that can be evaluated to having some value is converted to False by using not. For instance, an empty list would be a _Falsy_ (I am not a big fan of this word) value, hence a `not list()` would evaluate to True.

Same is the case with a `dict()`, or with an integer, 0 is False, anything non zero is True.

Read the [docs](http://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#truth-value-testing)

## Boolean Operators

Read the [docs](http://python.org/library/stdtypes.html#boolean-operations-and-or-not)

### or

```python
>>> True or False
True
>>> False or False
False
```

OR is true when either of the operand is true.

### and

AND is true when both the operands are true.

## Shortcut operators

+=, -=, /=, \*=

If you want to increment a variable by some value, instead of using `a = a + 2`, you can use `a+=2`. This is a shortcut method.
 There is no operator for `++` or `--`, you can use `a+=1` and `a-=1` for those purposes.

Along with this, you can use this syntax for other operations like -=, /=. In each of such operation you perform that operation and store it's value in the variable itself.

#### Comparision Operators

Read the [docs](https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#comparisons)

There are eight comparison operations in Python. They all have the same priority (which is higher than that of the Boolean operations). Comparisons can be chained arbitrarily; for example, x < y <= z is equivalent to x < y and y <= z, except that y is evaluated only once (but in both cases z is not evaluated at all when x < y is found to be false).

This table summarizes the comparison operations:
|Operation |	Meaning|
|------|------|
|< |	strictly less than|
|<= |	less than or equal|
|> 	|strictly greater than|
|>= |	greater than or equal|
|== |	equal|
|!= |	not equal|
|is |	object identity|
|is not |	negated object identity|

##### Links

|[Next](04-list-set-dict.md) | [Previous](03-01-understanding-variables.md) |  [Index](SUMMARY.md)
| ----| ----| ----|
